---
title: Bitcoin Babies: Uplifting Mothers in Kenya
post_status: publish
post_excerpt: I interview Bitcoin Babies to understand how their initiative is using Bitcoin to make a difference for mothers in Kenya.
featured_image: /_images/BitcoinBabiesUpliftingMothersinKenya.jpg
taxonomy:
 category:
  - using-bitcoin
  - adoption-africa
  - community-stories
  - female-empowerment
---

<iframe src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/1063442909?badge=0&amp;autopause=0&amp;player_id=0&amp;app_id=58479" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; fullscreen; picture-in-picture; clipboard-write; encrypted-media" title="Bitcoin Babies: Uplifting Mothers in Kenya"></iframe>

<div style="margin-bottom:30px;"></div>

## Excerpt

I interview Naomi and Veronica from Bitcoin Babies to understand how their initiative is using Bitcoin to make a difference for mothers in Kenya. They share how the project empowers mothers with financial literacy, small weekly Bitcoin payouts, and education on baby care, motherhood, and more. Watch to learn more about the amazing circular economy and to hear inspiring stories of mothers gaining financial independence, starting businesses, and navigating everyday challenges using Bitcoin.

## Transcript

Hello Naomi. Hi Anita, we are here. Where exactly? So we are in Kimbo Matangi. This is where we have our Bitcoin circular economy. We are actually in Best Ever, one of our merchants who accepts Bitcoin. And what is Bitcoin Babies? Bitcoin Babies is an initiative that supports moms with kids under the age of one or even pregnant moms. So we try to have a holistic approach in the kind of education we give them to make that transition to motherhood a bit easier, as well as using Bitcoin as a tool to empower them. How are you using Bitcoin here? So we teach them how to open wallets, and they can make small transactions using Bitcoin. They actually also can use Bitcoin as a way of saving their money and storing the value of their money. Mhm, super. Veronica, you are the local project leader? Yes. When did the project start? Okay, we started in March. That's when we officially launched it. We have a group of 13 moms around here. Yes, the moms live all here in this area? Yes, we all live in this area. And what do you teach the moms? So what we teach the moms is how they can well feed their babies, how they can deal with mental health awareness, how they can live and have financial freedom, and yeah, all that. And as far as I understand, the moms get paid in Bitcoin every week or every month? Yeah, there is a payout of $5 worth of sats that they receive weekly. They also have grants, which are also disbursed using Bitcoin. Okay, and they can spend it here, right? Yes, we have a group of merchants. Each area that a kid needs in life is covered. That is, we have a hospital, we have a pharmacy, butchery, grocery store, we have a poral meal, and we have a mini-mart. Yeah, but that's super. So basically, the moms can earn a little bit of Bitcoin every week by coming here. They learn something about financial literacy and also how to take care of their baby, and then they can spend the money here. So the merchants earn in Bitcoin too? Yes, the merchants are paid using Bitcoin. Mhm. And how, if someone then needs to pay something in Kenyan shillings, how do they convert it? So the mothers or the merchants—either way? Okay, for the merchants, we had an arrangement where if they are not able to convert to Kenyan shillings, they can send back the BTC to the Bitcoin Babies, and then we can issue them Kenyan shilling currency. Okay, so you help them. If people need Kenyan shillings, you help them cash it out? Yes. Okay, great. 
Tell us a little bit about the area. I think you were born here, right? I was born in an area nearby here, but Veronica is the one who has lived here for four years. Yeah, so I would say the area is for the average Kenyan. So, someone may be living on a salary of $150 a month or even lower because you can find rental houses of even $20 a month. So, I would say there’s an average Kenyan and there’s a very low-income Kenyan. And maybe I would like to add something to what Veronica said with the merchants. Actually, the thing she’s trying to explain is that at the beginning, we had an issue with merchants accepting Bitcoin. This is not the case for most of them now because you have people who need to restock the following day. So what we did for them was make the transition easier. We gave them some Kenyan shillings in advance, and then for us, the goal is for the moms to actually have Bitcoin in their hands and to know how Bitcoin really works. So, they are able to go to the merchant and buy in Bitcoin. But for the merchant who is worried if they’re going to be able to restock tomorrow, we just give them Kenyan shillings in advance. Then, when the moms come and make purchases that reach that amount, they can send it back to us, and we give them Kenyan shillings. But we have seen that they are also transitioning and just being able to accept Bitcoin by themselves. Uh-huh. And do you see moms actually also saving Bitcoin, or do they need to spend everything because they need the money? Yeah, there are a lot of moms who need maybe to spend it, but they also… like I would give an example of one mom whose husband could not allow her to keep some money. Now, she just uses the wallet to hide the money and not actually tell the husband that she has Bitcoin. Yeah, but that’s a great example of how Bitcoin empowers women. Yeah, I also think so. Because at the beginning, we also had a problem with a woman Veronica knows—her name was Janet someone. And it was not possible for her to join the program because the husband said, “Why are you sending the money to my partner without sending it to me?” because some men feel like money should only be given to them. Yeah. Yeah, and this is a big inequality, and it shouldn’t be that way. That’s why it’s so great that there is Bitcoin. Maybe, Veronica, do you have any special stories to tell about a mom whose life has been changed for the better already? Yeah, I have two in mind. We have Gladis. She has really gained a lot from this project. She did a driving course. Also, her baby wasn’t feeling well, and she got the care she needed. We have Ann. She received a grant and started a business. She cooks chapati; she does it well. So their lives have really changed. Gladis now has a skill she can earn with, and Ann has a business. So their lives have changed. Absolutely fantastic. Last question, Naomi. How do you fund the project? So I would say most of our funds have come from sponsors. Maybe I can mention a few. At the beginning, Machankura was one of our first sponsors, and Bitcoin Beach. The other one, I would say, is just generous people on Geyser. Yeah, so sponsorships. Okay, great. So we hope you get some more sponsorships or donations for this project because I feel it’s a great project that is empowering women. So thank you for that. Thank you too.
