---
title: What is Nostr? Exploring the Decentralized Social Network and App Recommendations
post_status: publish
post_excerpt: Learn about Nostr and how it enables uncensorable communication as a decentralized social network.
featured_image: /_images/WhatisNostrExploringTheDecentralizedSocialNetworkinclAppRecommendations.jpg
taxonomy:
 category:
  - nostr
---

<iframe src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/1021344680?badge=0&amp;autopause=0&amp;player_id=0&amp;app_id=58479" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; fullscreen; picture-in-picture; clipboard-write; encrypted-media" title="What is Nostr? Exploring The Decentralized Social Network (incl. App Recommendations)"></iframe>

<div style="margin-bottom:30px;"></div>

## Excerpt

Learn about Nostr and how it enables uncensorable communication as a decentralized social network. I describe how it integrates with the Bitcoin Lightning Network and give recommendations for apps. Watch now to see why Nostr could be the future of social media!

## Transcript

In short, Nostr is Twitter without Elon Musk and without a centralized company. Nostr is similar to the Bitcoin network in that it is a decentralized network protocol, but not for money - it's for a social networking system. So, there is no centralized company behind Nostr. It's not a product, just like Bitcoin is not a product. Twitter, or X how it's now called, is a product of a company. But Nostr - the name, by the way, stands for notes and other stuff transmitted by relay - a rather complicated name, but Nostr is easy to remember. In this decentralized network, anyone can start to run a relay, which is a computer comparable to a node in the Bitcoin network, and anyone can start using it. These relays distribute the information throughout the whole network. Another big difference from Twitter is that everything you share is uncensorable, meaning that no one can delete what you posted or can hinder you from speaking your mind which is is why it might become a communication tool for activists who otherwise are being censored by those in power. From that perspective, Nostr is very interesting, and it's also very popular with Bitcoin users as it shares the same principles around decentralization and privacy. Nostr also allows users to zap each other, meaning that authors of a post on Nostr, or a note how it's called there, can be immediately paid within the platform just with a click by their readers. So if you are on Nostr, you have your profile, and you can connect it with your Lightning address that you can get, for instance, at GetAlby, the Lightning wallet system. So it's very easy to set up. When you have connected your wallet with your Nostr profile, you see the notes of other people just like on Twitter, the feed, and you see a small Lightning bolt. If you click it, you can immediately send satoshis to the author of the note, which is great because people get paid for what they are writing, and it's very easy. So Nostr and Bitcoin, or let me say Nostr and the Lightning Network, are basically very closely connected to each other. Another similarity to Bitcoin is that you have in Nostr, you also have a public key and a private key. It's the same with Bitcoin, where you have a public key, which becomes your Bitcoin address, and your private key or private keys, which are basically within the seed - these 12 or 24 words you have from your self-custody wallets, these are your private keys. And the principle is the same on Nostr. And the great thing about that is also that if you have the private key to your profile, you can use any app that you want. So you can switch within the apps. Ok, it's a little bit complicated; I try to explain it in a different way. So on Twitter, if you have a Twitter account, you go to x.com, and there is your Twitter account, and you need to log in there. You can't take your Twitter account to Facebook and open it there. The same way around, you can't take your Facebook profile and put it on Twitter. It's different systems, it's different centralized systems. But within Nostr, you can, for instance - because the question was also which apps are good to use for Nostr - so if you have an iPhone, for instance, you can use the Damus app (maybe it's pronounced Damus, I don't know), D-A-M-U-S, or you can use Primal, P-R-I-M-A-L. I'm using Damus, and also on Android, I think one of the good apps is called Amethyst, like the stone. Exactly, what I wanted to say was, you can then take your private key, which is the basis of your Nostr profile, which gives you the property over your notes and your profile. You can take it and use it in any Nostr app, meaning I can use Damus. If I don't want to use it anymore or if I change to an Android phone, I can open up Amethyst, import my private key, and have my own feed again. So it's very flexible, I’m very mobile with my feed and my account, and I'm not depending on any companies or any app providers, which is a great thing actually for Nostr. So I could imagine that Nostr is becoming the next big social network, to be honest. It's a decentralized network; it has many advantages against or over the centralized networks, which can censor your posts, they can shadowban you, and you're totally depending on the social algorithm. Like, for instance, take me as an example from my experience with Twitter and other social media tools where there is an algorithm basically deciding if your tweets are being shown to more people or to less people. If your focus in your work is on a topic that interests fewer people, if you maybe speak a German accent in English, maybe not so many people want to watch your content, and then the algorithm takes this as the reason for showing even less of you. And it's the other way around. If you are watched by many people because you say controversial things, then the algorithm pushes you up so that more people see you. And this is magnified, it’s repeated and repeated, so those who are the loudest are seen, and those who are not as loud and maybe more reasonable or something like are not seen. This is something that doesn't work on Nostr because Nostr doesn't have any of these algorithms. So you can basically build your own feed, you build your own feed of people or voices you want to see or hear, and no one is interfering with that. And I believe this is a very positive side about Nostr, and also that it's a decentralized network and the interaction with Bitcoin might really be something that also brings Bitcoin adoption to many, many people who have never heard about Bitcoin and will maybe even never know that the zapping on Nostr is powered by the Lightning Network and in the future also by eCash.